cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl (#399)
KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs: extensions/cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl.asciidoc

// Copyright 2018-2020 The Khronos Group. This work is licensed under a
// Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License; see
// http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

:data-uri:
:icons: font
include::../config/attribs.txt[]
:source-highlighter: coderay

= cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl
:R: pass:q,r[^(R)^]
Khronos{R} OpenCL Working Group

== Name Strings

`cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl`

== Contact

Please see the *Issues* list in the Khronos *OpenCL-Docs* repository: +
https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs

== Contributors

Kevin Petit, Arm Ltd. +
Sven Van Haastregt, Arm Ltd. +
Anastasia Stulova, Arm Ltd. +
Marco Antognini, Arm Ltd. +
Neil Hickey, Arm Ltd. +

== Notice

include::../copyrights.txt[]

== Version

Built On: {docdate} +
Version: 1.0.0

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the OpenCL Specification
Version 3.0.2.

> This extension requires OpenCL 3.0 or OpenCL 2.x and `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

Reviewer: > This extension requires OpenCL 3.0 or **OpenCL 2.x** and `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

Emphasis mine.  Mostly out of curiosity rather than because I have a need for it, but is there any reason why OpenCL 1.2 and `cl_khr_extended_versioning` wouldn't be possible?

Author: C++ for OpenCL depends on OpenCL C 2.0 at the moment. We haven't really looked at how it interacts with OpenCL C 3.0 and optional language features. I'll add an explicit requirement on OpenCL C 2.0 here.

== Overview

This extension adds support for building programs written using the C++ for
OpenCL kernel language. It also enables applications to query the version of
the language supported by the device compiler.

== New build option

This extension adds support for a new `CLC++` value to be passed to the
`-cl-std` build option accepted by *clBuildProgram* and *clCompileProgram*.

This option is only valid for programs created using

> *clCreateProgramFromSource*.

Reviewer: The definition of `clCreateProgramFromSource` says:

> The devices associated with the program object are the devices associated with context. The source code specified by strings is either an OpenCL C program source, header or implementation-defined source for custom devices that support an online compiler. OpenCL C++ is not supported as an online-compiled kernel language through this interface.

Should this extension say something about causing `clCreateProgramFromSource` to accept C++ for OpenCL source?

Author: This is implied by the current text but being more explicit wouldn't hurt. I'll add something.

Reviewer: Yeah, I definitely agree that it's implied.

// Copyright 2018-2020 The Khronos Group. This work is licensed under a
// Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License; see
// http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

:data-uri:
:icons: font
include::../config/attribs.txt[]
:source-highlighter: coderay

= cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl
:R: pass:q,r[^(R)^]
Khronos{R} OpenCL Working Group

== Name Strings

`cl_ext_cxx_for_opencl`

== Contact

Please see the *Issues* list in the Khronos *OpenCL-Docs* repository: +
https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs

== Contributors

Kevin Petit, Arm Ltd. +
Sven Van Haastregt, Arm Ltd. +
Anastasia Stulova, Arm Ltd. +
Marco Antognini, Arm Ltd. +
Neil Hickey, Arm Ltd. +

== Notice

include::../copyrights.txt[]

== Status

> Draft

Reviewer 2: When will we change the status?

Author: The status makes less sense for an EXT (no formal approval or ratification), I'll remove the section entirely.

== Version

Built On: {docdate} +

> Version: 0.1.0

Reviewer 2: Do we need to update version here too?

Author: Yup, good catch, it would be nice if we could make that automatic.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the OpenCL Specification
Version 3.0.2.

> This extension requires OpenCL 3.0 or OpenCL 2.x and `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

Reviewer 2: Are we actually using anything from `cl_khr_extended_versioning` for this extension? Maybe it's better to say that functionality here is related to `cl_khr_extended_versioning` or expected to follow similar principles?

If it's possible to avoid an extra dependency it would be better.

> This extension requires OpenCL 3.0 or OpenCL 2.x and `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

Reviewer: `cl_version` comes from `cl_khr_extended_versioning` (well, technically that is `cl_version_khr`, but same thing).

> This extension requires OpenCL 3.0 or OpenCL 2.x and `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

Author: The `cl_version_khr` type was introduced by `cl_khr_extended_versioning`. That's the reason for the dependency.

== Overview

This extension adds support for building programs written using the C++ for
OpenCL kernel language. It also enables applications to query the version of

> the language supported by the device compiler.

Reviewer 2: Since the language documentation is not published in the register do we want to add a link to pdf blob:
https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Khronosdotorg/blob/master/api/opencl/assets/CXX_for_OpenCL.pdf

Although maybe it's also time to think of a better way to publish this and a process.

FYI, we will probably attach pdf as an artifact once we create a tag for C++ for OpenCL on GitHub?

== New build option

> This extension adds support for a new `CLC++` value to be passed to the

Author: We feel it's a bit early to have a version number in the build option but that's certainly something we'd want to do in the future as the language stabilises (potentially as part of a ratification).

> This extension adds support for a new `CLC++` value to be passed to the

Reviewer: Yes, okay, `-cl-std=CLC++` seems fine for now.  I'll resolve this comment.

`-cl-std` build option accepted by *clBuildProgram* and *clCompileProgram*.

This option is only valid for programs created using
*clCreateProgramFromSource*.

== New API Enums

Accepted value for the _param_name_ parameter to *clGetDeviceInfo*:

[source,c]
----
CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT       0x4220
----

== Modifications to the OpenCL API Specification

(Modify Section 4.2, *Querying Devices*) ::
+
--

(Add the following to Table 4.3, _Device Queries_) ::
+
--

[cols="1,1,4",options="header"]
|====
| cl_device_info
| Return Type
| Description

> | `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT`

Author: Yes, this was a deliberate choice. Since the language is still young/experimental and no versions have been formally ratified, we thought reporting a single version made more sense. We don't want to set expectations with respect to support for older versions.

> | `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT`

Reviewer: Okay.

> | `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT`

Reviewer 2: However, if we use `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_ALL_VERSIONS_EXT` we don't lose anything and in case we start to version the language we won't need to propose yet another extension or a version of an extension which is obviously more complicated for vendors and developers. It will also make things better aligned with the general direction.

> | `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT`

Author: Discussed with Anastasia offline: we decided to report a single version as per my message above but rename the query to `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_NUMERIC_VERSION_EXT` for consistency with `cl_khr_extended_versioning`.

> | `CL_DEVICE_CXX_FOR_OPENCL_VERSION_EXT`

Reviewer: Okay, makes sense to me.  I'll resolve this.

| `cl_version`

> | Returns the version of the C++ for OpenCL specification implemented by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Returns the version of the C++ for OpenCL language supported by the
```

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to change this since we don't have the specification formally.

Author: Yes, I think I prefer that as well.

>   device compiler.

Author: We touched on that during a call. We'd want to tag OpenCL-Docs with versions of C++ for OpenCL. It would have its own independent version number. We don't think mandating anything makes sense at this stage given the current "moving target" nature of the language. As to what the current version is, the spec currently says that it would be https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/blob/master/cxx4opencl/diff2openclc.txt#L147 but we may want to use a smaller number.

>   device compiler.

Reviewer: The current C++ for OpenCL document says "version v3.0.3-rc" at the top, so without something to override that, like the OpenCL C spec does, a reader is likely to assume that is the version number.

But for the general principal of no number while a "moving target", okay.

>   device compiler.

Author: Yes, that's a good point. We probably ought to change this. Thanks for flagging.

>   device compiler.

Reviewer: Given the problem actually exists outside of this extension point I think this comment can be resolved by just filing an issue,

>   device compiler.

Author: I've created https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/issues/420 to cover what we discussed in the last teleconference.
